########################
Schema Migration Process
########################

Add columns to sdm_schemas
==========================

- Add the requested database additions, justifications, and where they are generated to our `confluence entry table <https://rubinobs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DM/pages/246644760/Consolidated+Database+Non-EFD+Entries>`_.
- Create a ticket and edit the repository at https://github.com/lsst/sdm_schemas to apply your schema changes to any of the ``cdb_*.yml`` schemas.
- If your sdm_schemas PR has issues, check that the schema conforms to Felis's data model and valid SQL tables can be created with `felis validate/create <https://felis.lsst.io/user-guide/cli.html#felis-validate>`_
- Alembic migrations should be automatically created by a git workflow after your sdm_schemas pull request completes.

Create an Alembic Migration (manually)
======================================

- Alembic (https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/front.html) keeps track of versioning by autogenerated migrations to sync the test stands and summit databases.
- Versioning our database schema changes allows us to apply edits and move the database’s state forward or backward as needed.

1. Create an Alembic migration on your ConsDB ticket branch.
2. Use the script ``consdb/alembic-autogenerate.py`` to generate Alembic migrations.
3. Follow the directions in the header of the script, then run ``python alembic-autogenerate.py`` to create version files in respective database-named directories in ``consdb/alembic/``.
4. Manually edit the generated files in ``consdb/alembic/<table-name>/`` to:

- Remove the ``visit1`` and ``ccdvisit1`` views.
- Ensure constraints and renamed columns are correct.

Test alembic migration
======================
- You will need to test the version migrating the TTS db using your ConsDB branch on before merging or applying the migration to the Summit.
- This testing should include testing any code that populates the new columns/tables at TTS/BTS if Summit schema is changing.

1. Update the deployment on the test stand:
-------------------------------------------

- Choose the appropriate test stand (TTS, BTS)
- Create a branch in ``phalanx`` and edit the corresponding test stand environment file ``phalanx/applications/consdb/values-<test stand>.yaml`` to point to your branch's built docker image (tickets-DM-###).
- Coordinate and announce in the appropriate slack channel that you will begin testing your migrations.
- Update the ConsDB deployment in ``<url.to.teststand>/argo-cd`` to use your ``phalanx`` branch in the ``Target Revision``. Refresh and check pod logs.
- Verify the tables that you will be upgrading exist using ``psql``
- From the ``consdb/`` directory, (where ``alembic.ini`` file is) use the alembic commands to upgrade the existing database tables: ``alembic upgrade head -n <database name>``
- Deploy new ConsDB software (``hinfo``, ``pqserver``) and check the initial logs.

2. Test with LATISS imaging in ATQueue:
---------------------------------------

- Access LOVE via ``<url.to.teststand>/love`` and use the 1Password admin information to sign in, or your SLAC username and password.
- Navigate to the ATQueue or Auxillary Telescope (AuxTel) Script Queue.
- See (TTS Start Guide)[https://rubinobs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/LSSTCOM/pages/53739987/Tucson+Test+Stand+Start+Guide] for guidelines on using the test stands.
- Before editing these scripts, note their starting configurations, as we will return the configuration to that when we are done.
- Take a test/simulated picture with LATISS through the ATQueue using these three scripts:

1. ``set_summary_state.py`` Change the configuration to set ATHeaderService and ATCamera to ENABLED.
2. ``enable_latiss.py`` Remove any existing configuration.
3. ``take_image_latiss.py`` Update the configuration to remove anything that is not 'nimages' (1) and 'image_type' (BIAS or DARK or FLAT)

- Once you have put these three scripts in the queue, click ``run``.
- Watch for errors in the Script Queue and the Argo-CD ConsDB pod logs and ``hinfo-latiss`` deployment.
- Address any errors and retest.
- Check the database by using ``psql`` commands like ``\dt`` to display the table names and maybe even ``SELECT * from cdb_latiss.exposure where day_obs == <YYYYMMDD>;`` to view the most recent data.

- Run set_summary_state to set ATHeaderService and ATCamera back to STANDBY, and return LATISS back to STANDBY.
- Then return these three scripts to their original configurations.

- If you have encountered errors in this process, do not proceed to the summit, but address those errors and retest them with your ``phalanx`` branch pointing to your ConsDB branch with the updates that fix the errors.


- If tests are successful, create a pull request for the Alembic migration in ConsDB. Tag the release according to ``standards-practices`` guidelines.
- Update your existing phalanx branch to point the environment based deployments to this ConsDB tag.
- You are able to retest on the test stand at this point, hopefully there were no changes to your ConsDB pull request so this step is trivial.


Deploy migration in synchrony at Summit (if necessary), USDF, and Prompt Release (if necessary)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- What is prompt release?


Deploy code to populate db at Summit and/or USDF
------------------------------------------------

- Follow the testing steps above for testing alembic migration and code at TTS/BTS, before the you consider deploying at the summit.

- The steps to deploy at the summit mirror the steps to test on a test stand with coordination and permission from the observers and site teams.
- Access to argo-cd deployments is available via the Summit OpenVPN.
- To coordinate your deployment update on the summit, you must attend Coordination Activities Planning (CAP) meeting on Tuesday mornings and announce your request.

- Add it to the agenda here: https://rubinobs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/LSSTCOM/pages/53765933/Agenda+Items+for+Future+CAP+Meetings

- The CAP members may tell you a time frame that is acceptable for you to perform these changes.

- They may also tell you specific people to coordinate with to help you take images to test LATISS and LSSTCOMCAMSIM tables. There will be more tables to test eventually.
- Channels to note: #rubinobs-test-planning; #summit-announce; #summit-auxtel, https://obs-ops.lsst.io/Communications/slack-channel-usage.html.

- When you get your final approval and designated time to perform the changes to ConsDB, announce on #summit-announce, and follow similar steps as test stand procedure above.

USDF Deployment Steps
---------------------

- Must happen in synchrony with Summit deployment

1. Disable (pause) SUBSCRIPTION at USDF. (in what table)
2. Perform the migration at the summit with the steps below before step 3.
3. Connect to the USDF database via psql and perform the alembic migration.
4. Check or test as agreed upon with the ConsDB team.
5. Enable and Refresh Subscription at USDF.

If there is no impact or coordination with Summit needed: Run alembic migration at USDF, and test as appropriate.

Summit Deployment Steps
-----------------------

1. Use a branch in ``phalanx`` to point to the ConsDB tag for deployment.
2. Set the Argo-CD application ``consdb's`` target revision to your ``phalanx`` branch.
3. Refresh the ConsDB application and review pod logs.
4. Connect to the summit database via psql and perform the alembic migration.
5. Have an image taken with the observing team, then verify database entries with a SQL query or Jupyter notebook.
6. Check your new entries in the database using a jupyter notebook or SQL query in RSP showing your new image has been inserted to the database as expected.

- Once deployment succeeds, set the ``Target Revision`` in Argo-CD back to ``main`` and complete the ``phalanx`` PR for the tested ConsDB tag.
